% Options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode}{hyperref}
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
%
\documentclass[
]{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
  \usepackage{textcomp} % provide euro and other symbols
\else % if luatex or xetex
  \usepackage{unicode-math}
  \defaultfontfeatures{Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \defaultfontfeatures[\rmfamily]{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=1}
\fi
% Use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{% use microtype if available
  \usepackage[]{microtype}
  \UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\makeatletter
\@ifundefined{KOMAClassName}{% if non-KOMA class
  \IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
    \usepackage{parskip}
  }{% else
    \setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
    \setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}}
}{% if KOMA class
  \KOMAoptions{parskip=half}}
\makeatother
\usepackage{xcolor}
\IfFileExists{xurl.sty}{\usepackage{xurl}}{} % add URL line breaks if available
\IfFileExists{bookmark.sty}{\usepackage{bookmark}}{\usepackage{hyperref}}
\hypersetup{
  hidelinks,
  pdfcreator={LaTeX via pandoc}}
\urlstyle{same} % disable monospaced font for URLs
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
% Set default figure placement to htbp
\makeatletter
\def\fps@figure{htbp}
\makeatother
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em} % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{-\maxdimen} % remove section numbering
% https://github.com/rstudio/rmarkdown/issues/337
\let\rmarkdownfootnote\footnote%
\def\footnote{\protect\rmarkdownfootnote}

% https://github.com/rstudio/rmarkdown/pull/252
\usepackage{titling}
\setlength{\droptitle}{-2em}

\pretitle{\vspace{\droptitle}\centering\huge}
\posttitle{\par}

\preauthor{\centering\large\emph}
\postauthor{\par}

\predate{\centering\large\emph}
\postdate{\par}

\date{}

\begin{document}

\hypertarget{motive-opportunity}{%
\section{Connecting Home Prices to Voting}\label{motive-opportunity}}

\begin{quote}
``We're creating\ldots an ownership society in this country, where more
Americans than ever will be able to open up their door where they live
and say, welcome to my house, welcome to my piece of
property.''\footnote{Klein, ``Disowned by the Ownership Society.''}
\end{quote}

The Housing and Economic Recovery Act (HERA) countered the unfurling
crisis with a hodgepodge of policies aimed, variously, at mitigating
spillover effects of the subprime mortgage crisis. This aim congrued
with the Bush administration's ``ownership society'', which added moral
heft to the legal onus placed on individuals to become solely
responsible for their own property. By mitigating spillover effects, the
Neighborhood Stabilization Program would attempt to isolate homes from
the ``animal spirits''\footnote{Keynes and Krugman, \emph{The General
  Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money}.} of the surrounding
market(s), and focus success or failure of a person's finances on their
own actions. However, despite the ideological congruence between the NSP
and Bush's ownership society, the Neighborhood Stabilization Program
departed from the Republican Party by privatizing government money for
less (or even negatively) affluent people. In the United States, both
Republican and Democratic parties have connected this action with higher
taxation, and with the Democratic Party. So, while the policies fit with
the Bush administration, their ideological dimension tended more towards
the Democratic Party.

But, as mentioned early in @ref(actors-motive), opposing the leftward
pull of ideology is the rightward push of rising wealth. Higher levels
of wealth and income are colloquially associated with conservatism, but
there is little research on the economic mechanisms beyond class that
push such people towards their political decisions. THIS IS NOT TRUE As
such, the rightward push of rising wealth was not a given: after World
War II, taxation was not a weighty political issue,\footnote{Campbell,
  ``How Americans Think About Taxes,'' 160.} let alone a wedge issue.
Rather, responses to California's Proposition 13 and reverberations of
Reaganite rhetoric led Republicans ``to define themselves and their
party in opposition to taxes.''\footnote{Martin, ``Welcome to the Tax
  Cutting Party,'' 128.} Third Way Democrats, led by President Bill
Clinton, accepted tax cuts in their successful political bids---it was
only in the 2000s that Democrats on a national level united (more or
less) in opposition to lower taxation.

The mortgage crisis hit at a moment in American politics when the two
parties agreed that---along with wars in the Middle East---taxation and
visible, means-tested welfare were the political issues of the day; the
only difference was the moral valence each party attached to the issues.
The connection between taxation, welfare, and party platforms came to a
head in the late 2000s. After the mortgage crisis ushered in a financial
crisis and the Great Recession, economic policy adopted a militant
vocabulary. In response, grassroots anti-tax movements (thoroughly
astroturfed by conservative non-profits) took up equally rhetorical
arms, with CNBC reporter Rick Santelli sounding the battle cry of the
Tea Party Movement.

The Tea Party Movement sharpened the debate over taxes. What had been
salient in the decades before the trauma of the financial and mortgage
crises re-emerged as the guiding issue of the Republican Party. The
salience of taxation, and the formalization of candidates into members
of the Tea Party Caucus, provide a theoretical underpinning to this
study. Without the self-professed and much-discussed focus on taxation
during the 2010 midterm elections, analyzing voters' awareness of
candidates' tax positions would be required in order to effectively
argue that voting behavior ran with tax policies. The focus on taxation,
and the clear connection between expenditures on visible welfare
programs and higher taxation, make possible the aggregation of
individual tax preferences into party voting.

In this chapter, I dive into how the Neighborhood Stabilization Program
fit ideologically with the Bush administration, and the Republican Party
between 2008 and 2010. I argue that the NSP hewed more closely to the
ideology of the Democratic Party than of the Republican Party between
2008 and 2010. Further, the snugness of this fit was not a given, but
was contingent on a tax protest movement like that of the Tea Party.
American party politics were crucial to corralling the effects of
foreclosure relief programs into legible distinctions for vote analysts.

\hypertarget{the-neighborhood-stabilization-program-ideologically}{%
\subsection{The Neighborhood Stabilization Program,
Ideologically}\label{the-neighborhood-stabilization-program-ideologically}}

Section 2301(a) of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008
appropriates \$3,920,000,000

\begin{quote}
for assistance to States and units of general local government (as such
terms are defined in section 102 of the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5302)) for the redevelopment of
abandoned and foreclosed upon homes and residential properties.
\end{quote}

Due to the size of the bill passed and the extent of modifications by a
range of members, it is unclear who inserted the provision. However, a
select few news sources picked up on the insertion, including a Reuters
piece which claimed ``The White House had originally opposed a provision
that offers \$4 billion in grants to states to buy and repair foreclosed
homes.''\footnote{Pelofsky, ``Bush Signs Housing Bill as Fannie Mae
  Grows.''} The opposition by the Bush administration of the \$4 billion
outlay, a mere 1.3\% of the \$300 billion ensured to Fannie Mae,
indicates that the amender likely belonged to the Democratic Party.
Albeit brief, this opposition---the only opposition mentioned in an
article awash in hundred-billion-dollar outlays---is surprising given
its size and the power held by the federal government.

The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) administered the
funds through its Community Development Block Grant program, a core
piece of HUD's community investment apparatus. By routing the funding
through a pre-existing program, the bill's writers sought to leverage
established lines of communication between HUD and the several states.
This provision also avoided long-term commitments by HUD to far-flung
localities, pushing the purchase and selling of properties to an
arms-length. But, while the bill collected information and
decision-making at the local level, its compliance regulations were
still onerous. Dan Immergluck argues in Immergluck\footnote{\emph{Preventing
  the Next Mortgage Crisis}.} that ensuing language in HERA, which
limits localities to purchase properties at a discount from market
price, lessened the program's efficacy. Much like a buyer of used cars,
houses at a discount are more likely, \emph{a priori}, to be lemons,
since the seller wouldn't take less than market price for an
above-average quality home. Beyond that, federal oversight of localities
was intense, as the administration took an extremely risk-averse
approach to mismanagement of funds, fitting the image pushed by
conservatives in Bush's party of housing programs as loci of graft and
inefficiency.

Funds were originally calculated by a need-based formula factoring in
rates of foreclosure, subprime borrowing, and payment delinquency in
order to address areas ``identified by the State or unit of general
local government as likely to face a significant rise in the rate of
home foreclosures.''\footnote{Pelosi, ``HERA.''} In doing so, the
legislation aimed to use the buying power of the federal government to
bid up prices in neighborhoods by taking housing stock off the market
(at least temporarily), recording purchase prices close to (but, as per
requirement, lower than) market levels, and reselling said housing stock
after capital investments (in the form of maintenance and repairs). The
political import of this plan is difficult to understand in the vacuum
of it and its party supporters. At the time, dispossessed homeowners and
their coalitions called for principal reductions, a common decision in
courts of equity and bankruptcy cases, or immediate relief to homeowners
currently in default. Rather than direct cash transfers, which would
have enhanced individual freedom by loosening budget constraints, or
pass-through payments to debt holders, which would have promoted
rent-seeking by those debt holders, the Neighborhood Stabilization
Program advocated for indirect pushes on home equity.

The NSP attempted to cosset homeowners from endogenous shocks,
recognizing the social dislocation caused by such a stupid destruction
of private wealth. While some homeowners could be painted as the kind of
irresponsible, purely-speculating ``deadbeats'' characterized in
Dayen\footnote{\emph{Chain of Title}.} and Michael Lewis' \emph{The Big
Short}, it is important to remember that the majority of those
foreclosed upon were prime borrowers.\footnote{Ferreira and Gyourko, ``A
  New Look at the U.S. Foreclosure Crisis.''} Further, the distress of
prime borrowers came somewhat after that of subprime borrowers, as seen
in @ref(fig:distress) (though that is partially because there was more
``fuel left to burn'' in the sense that the number subprime borrowers,
around 20\% of the market, had already been slashed). These facts
suggest that neighborhoods with prime borrowers contracted the
foreclosure contagion from subprime borrowers, which fits in the
narrative of responsible, well-to-do homeowners forced into foreclosure
by their subprime neighbors.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figure/ferreira_absolute}

}

\caption{Total foreclosures and short sales by owner type.}\label{fig:distress1}
\end{figure}
\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figure/ferreira_distress}

}

\caption{Probability of home loss by owner type.}\label{fig:distress2}
\end{figure}

Protected from the shocks to home prices (and thus home equity), the
success or failure of borrowers' real estate investment would then
depend purely on their payments. To maintain the idea of a meritocratic
path to the American Dream, from time to time the route must be cleared
of such hazards. The Neighborhood Stabilization Program did not aim,
like its administrative superstructure does, to develop communities in
any meaningful way. Rescuing communities from visual blight were
incidental effects of the policy and tied only to blight's impact on
home prices. Rather, the NSP aimed at a lower, more foundational goal of
saving the plunging home equities of several million individuals.

This individuation, this buffer from the market, is a privilege long
conferred upon the American home in law and policy. The private-public
distinction is made much sharper for homeowners than for renters.
Consider for instance 4th Amendment cases, where property law still
dominates legal interpretations despite the impact of \emph{Katz v.
United States}, which expanded what the 4th Amendment shielded to
include more person-centric concepts.\footnote{Stern, ``The Inviolate
  Home.''} Or consider the mortgage interest deduction, a large subsidy
applied to owner-occupied properties. The history of American housing
policy---both as centralized legislation and decentralized legal
interpretation---has conferred on homeowners (who are by construction
also land owners) additional rights when compared to renters, expanding
the legal extent of their individual selves.

These privileges made up much of the popular appeal of George W. Bush's
``ownership society''. While it lived a larger life in the media than in
Bush's own remarks, the philosophy backed up much of Bush's domestic
policy. The definition is almost self-evident: an America where as much
is owned and controlled by individuals as is feasible. Bush explained
the logic guiding this idea by claiming that ``The more ownership there
is in America, the more vitality there is in America, and the more
people have a vital stake in the future of this country.''\footnote{``America's
  Ownership Society.''} With this claim came a raft of policies
demonstrating the promise of an ownership society. Under this capacious
roof, the administration enclosed health savings accounts, more
individualized retirement options, and policies aimed at increasing
homeownership. These policies included the American Dream Downpayment
Initiative, which tied homeownership explicitly to the American Dream,
and the Single-Family Affordable Housing Tax Credit.\footnote{``Homeownership
  Policy Book.''} By encouraging single-family homes in the ``Nation's
inner cities'', thinning the density of apartment complexes and
tenements, this last provision hearkened back to New Deal marketing,
which idealized the home as a Romantic ``refuge from urban
corruption.''\footnote{Stern, ``The Inviolate Home,'' 910.} Bush's
ownership society provisions also included a ``tripling of
funding''\footnote{``Homeownership Policy Book.''} for a program that
swapped personal or volunteer labor for housing assistance, known in
low-income housing development as ``sweat equity''. These programs in
aggregate, pushed a narrative of meritocratic access to consumer credit
spurring individual ownership. The NSP, in turn, slotted into this story
by insulating responsible (\emph{i.e.} those who have not yet
defaulted)---if low-income---debtors from the vagaries of wily housing
markets.

Such a conformity with Bush's animating philosophy, despite the
program's brief opposition by the president, places the Neighborhood
Stabilization Program in murky territory with regard to party
affiliation. If voters were unable to locate programs like the NSP
within Democratic or Republican platforms, then there would be no reason
why pro--home price policies translate into Republican votes. Bush's
ownership society performed an entirely unrevolutionary act by
presenting homeownership as a bedrock of ideal (and idyllic) America, as
such a message had been pushed by presidents on both sides of the aisle
since at least the Great Depression.\footnote{Stoller, ``The Housing
  Crash and the End of American Citizenship.''} But while the values
cherished by Bush's ownership society aligned with American
conservatism, its distinctive policies were afield of the
contemporaneous Republican platform. Instead, the policies looked like a
{[}more{]} moralistic version of Democratic plans for affordable housing
and access to credit.

Republican focus on taxation and opposition to visible, continuing
welfare assistance crowded out other domestic policy issues, like the
politics of debt that had been so visible to Midwest farmers in the
1930s, Massachusetts farmers in the 1780s, and opponents of the Cross of
Gold in the late 19th century. Instead, what talk there was regarding
debt were byproducts of a more general concern over asset prices. This
talk proceeded from the expansion of finance's place in the economy and
culture of the United States. While bankers had always been handsomely
paid, it was not until the liberalizations of the Reagan era that its
ranks swelled in quantity and individual wealth. These included passage
of the Garn--St.~Germain Depository Institutions Act of 1982---which
Paul Krugman holds responsible for the savings and loan crisis\footnote{Krugman,
  ``Reagan Did It.''} for its grant of permission to private lenders for
the sale of adjustable-rate mortgages---but I pay particular attention
to the exaltation of multinational creditors in mortgage markets. A year
before the Garn--St.~Germain Act, Reagan enacted his signature reform,
the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which allowed troubled savings
and loan institutions to sell home mortgages and consequently write down
their tax burdens.\footnote{Lewis, ``The Fat Men and Their Marvelous
  Money Machine.''} This provision opened the floodgates for
private-label mortgage securitization; where savings and loans had
dominated the private market, investment banks could now cash in. By
definition, it was these creditors that enabled the expansion of
mortgage-backed securities to subprime lenders, and with them,
significant economic growth.

Between 1981 and 2007, outstanding residential mortgage debt---shown in
@ref(fig:hhdebt)---swelled from 37\% of US gross domestic product to
82\%, more than doubling in relative size.\footnote{Board of Governors
  of the Federal Reserve System (US), ``MDOTPFP''; Board of Governors of
  the Federal Reserve System (US), ``MDOTPNNRP''; Board of Governors of
  the Federal Reserve System (US), ``MDOAH''; U.S. Bureau of Economic
  Analysis, ``GDPA.''} On the other side of the largest pool of consumer
debt in the world stood an even larger pool of capital. While the
rampant foreign direct investment (FDI) of Japan and Germany are oft
noted in economic histories of the 1980s, potentially more significant
were the destination of such capital flows. Herman Schwartz
disaggregates the flows of FDI entering and exiting the United States to
explain why, despite the large {[}net{]} debt position of America, the
country was not hamstrung by austerity provisions but actually received
net positive income. His answer is that the consumption-driven American
economy leveraged credit made cheap by global disinflation to extend its
own resources and drive aggregate demand.\footnote{Schwartz,
  \emph{Subprime Nation}.} Global disinflation resulted partially from
the sheer supply of credit and in turn made the interest rates offered
by mortgage-backed securities a viable alternative to dampening rates of
return from traditional investments. This process fueled itself for a
while: lower interest rates meant that buyers could afford more
expensive homes on the same monthly payments, bidding up the prices of
homes; when nearby home prices appreciated, homeowners could refinance,
paying off the first mortgage, marginally lowering the risk and thus
interest rate for the next mortgagee in the market. This process played
out in every country able to profitably securitize mortgages, but the
Reagan administration's reconfiguration of credit enabled the United
States to reap the world's largest benefits---Schwartz credits this
system with driving the United States' differential growth above the
rich Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
countries between 1991 and 2005.\footnote{Schwartz, 4.}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth]{figure/residential_debt_gdp}

}

\caption{Outstanding US residential mortgage debt as a percentage of US gross domestic product.}\label{fig:hhdebt}
\end{figure}

More than good macroeconomic policy, the growth buffered homeowners from
wage stagnation or job loss altogether. In conjunction with liberalized
finance, labor norms and regulations that had protected the Fordist
labor compact linking 30-year employment with 30-year mortgages were
repealed. While these repeals have wrought huge blows to bargaining
power, their perceived impact was aided---and perhaps eclipsed---by the
spatial and international movements of manufacturing jobs away from the
organized mid-Atlantic and Midwest, to the unorganized American South,
and ultimately abroad to the Global South. In any case, labor markets
became increasingly volatile in the United States, necessitating some
form of insurance. Matt Stoller argues that the exaltation of finance,
subordination of labor, and mitigation of social insurance policies can
be viewed macrosocially as a renegotiation of the American social
contract inaugurated by the New Deal.\footnote{Stoller, ``The Housing
  Crash and the End of American Citizenship.''} Where businesses had
profited on the aggregate demand generated by collectively-bargained
salaries and the commensurate long-term commitments by employer and
employee, the new asset-backed political economy\footnote{Note too the
  growth in equity holdings by Americans. In 1962, 1 in 7 households
  held more than \$2,000 in stocks; in 1983, with the growth of IRAs and
  defined-contribution plans, nearly 1 in 4 households hold more than
  \$2,000 in stock (1992 dollars)., Poterba et al., ``Stock Ownership
  Patterns, Stock Market Fluctuations, and Consumption,'' 321} discarded
with the need for stable, steadily increasing salaries. These jobs,
salaries, and benefits then acted as dragnets on profits, ultimately
jettisoned at the behest of shareholders. In return, the asset-backed
social contract offered cheap credit and the Minskyan promise of
speculative returns to supplement, or supplant, income.

By locating this process in the Reagan administration, I have obviously
extended beyond 1991, which I mentioned in @ref(actors-motive) as the
start of continually-increasing home prices. I point to somewhere in the
late 1990s as an inflection point in the Minsky cycle, pictured in
@ref(fig:minsky), between speculative and Ponzi financing, a point
before which housing was foundational to this new ``social contract''
but not overheated so as to wreak the damage it ultimately wrought.
Despite 1991's brief negative sojourn, this agreement was contingent on
rising home prices, and leveraged by Bush the elder as well as Bill
Clinton in their presidencies. Housing, often couched in the language of
the American Dream, supported many (WHOSE?) national campaigns. And,
while there were differences between Republican and Democratic housing
platforms, what united their approaches was a vocabulary of taxation and
credit, not debt. Despite the rich history of debt politics among
American farmers, parties focused on access to loans and reductions to
government revenues rather than creditors' profits.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth]{figure/minsky}

}

\caption{Minsky cycle, theorized by Hyman Minsky.}\label{fig:minsky}
\end{figure}

To be sure, this vocabulary was a rational response to the rising home
prices---so long as markets showed signs of growth, debt relief would be
a minor issue, while tax reductions and access to credit extended
individual budgets. But it was not uniquely rational: dependable debt
relief could, if annualized, be indistinguishable from a similarly-sized
mortgage tax credit; after all, with all the easy credit, there was
certainly enough debt to go around---in addition to mortgage debt
equaling 82\% of gross domestic product, mortgage debt service payments
in 2007 increased 75\% over 1981 levels.\footnote{Board of Governors of
  the Federal Reserve System (US), ``MDSP.''}

To summarize, the Neighborhood Stabilization Program sought to insulate
homeowners from the market by using the buying power of the federal
government to fix local home prices. This program, despite the initial
opposition of the Bush administration, fit with George W. Bush's
``ownership society'', which emphasized private, family-owned property
as both a social and economic doctrine. But Bush's ownership society,
while conservative, helped established and would-be homeowners manage
and mitigate their debt load. This practice ran contrary to nation-wide
Republican platforms, which emphasized a politics of taxation. It was
not that the NSP completely contradicted the Grand Old Party, but rather
that policies affecting housing debt (and wealth) were outside the scope
of national rhetoric; debt was illegible to Republican voters. Instead,
Republicans cast housing debt---and programs that help homeowners pay
down housing debt---as a burden to the tax base. But why, and how, was a
question of debt transfigured into one of taxation? Answering this
question offers more than colorful background; understanding how tax and
debt politics fall contingently into particular parties (or out of the
mainstream altogether) bridges the gap between rational choice
preferences and Congressional representative voting outcomes. My answer
also connects taxes with expenditures, a non-trivial connection that
will become very popular when individual preferences for social
insurance are considered in the next chapter.

\hypertarget{centering-of-tax-policy-by-the-republican-party}{%
\subsection{Centering of Tax Policy by the Republican
Party}\label{centering-of-tax-policy-by-the-republican-party}}

I argue that the tax ``revolts''\footnote{To use Isaac Williams Martin's
  term.} kicked off by Proposition 13 in California brought to the fore
the question of taxes. Reagan's presidential campaign then finalized the
centering of taxation in Republican domestic policy. By centering
taxation---and succeeding politically in its implementation---the
Republican Party led voters to expect tax cuts and trained taxpayers to
see themselves as a political class. With taxation in the center, and
Democrats playing a softer version of Republicans' tune, debt politics
became illegible as politics, rendering any small resurgence as a social
(rather than political) movement.

Despite some notable tax activism (see: Boston Tea Party), Americans
were generally quiet about taxes well into the 20th century. This
phenomenon was no doubt largely because the federal income tax fell on
no one, until 1913, or a tiny proportion (\textless6\%) of the United
States population until 1940.\footnote{``Historical Sources of Income
  and Tax Items.''} But after that point, the direction of tax
expenditures---towards national defense in the beginning of the Cold War
and for New Deal welfare programs such as the Social Security Act---were
popular enough to discourage politicians from taking aim at tax
cuts.\footnote{Campbell, ``How Americans Think About Taxes,'' 160.} This
equilibrium continued until the 1960s. The fiscally-conservative
Southern Democrats who controlled Congress' tax-writing
committees\footnote{Campbell, 162.} were then voted out of office or
changed party allegiances following federal enforcement of Civil Rights
Movement legal judgments (such as \emph{Brown v. Board of Education}),
the passage of the Civil Rights and Voting acts, and finally Nixon's
Southern Strategy in the 1970s.

Then, in 1978, Californians voted in favor of Proposition 13, which
limited the property tax rate to 1\%. Proposition 13 emerged out of a
long-fought battle by tax activists against the rationalization and
modernization of property tax assessment.\footnote{Martin, ``Welcome to
  the Tax Cutting Party.''} Tax assessors declined to re-appraise
property values at common intervals, leading to ``fractional
assessment'' that, in 1971, ``was ten times greater than the home
mortgage interest deduction,''\footnote{Martin, 9.} which is often
referenced as an invisible form of welfare to the rich. The success of
Proposition 13 realized the potential of anti-tax movements in post-war,
post--New Deal American politics. Interviews of Congressional staffers
at the time referred to a `Proposition 13 mentality'\footnote{Kingdon,
  \emph{Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies}, 97.} and President
Jimmy Carter said the result ``sent a shock wave through the
consciousness of every public servant.''\footnote{Jarvis and Pack,
  \emph{I'm Mad as Hell}, 3.} Interestingly, Proposition 13 was not
destined for the Republican platform from the outset; Isaac William
Martin subverts this perception by noting the colorful array of
leftists, hippies, anti-government organizers, and 9-to-5-ers that
marched in the streets in support of the referendum, and President
Carter's comment above highlights the immediacy with which Democrats
understood Proposition 13's political effects. Rather, it was Reagan's
signature tax cuts that assimilated the anti-tax fervor to the
Republican platform, and probably the visibility that Barry
Goldwater---extreme as he was---enjoyed in his run for president.

It is important to note now where my account stands with regard to a
theory of political change. In @ref(actors-motive), I briefly engaged
farmer activism in the Great Depression, a mass movement that saw
thousands pack courthouses and politicians' offices. Here, I make a
slight turn: while again activism prompted radical shifts in policy, the
Republican turn did not feature near-intimidation tactics, nor did ``an
astonishing array of antediluvian automobiles {[}\ldots{} swarm{]} over
the capitol.''\footnote{Fliter and Hoff, \emph{Fighting Foreclosure}.}
The tax revolt ``did not change what most people thought about taxes,
{[}but{]} it \emph{did} change how much the major parties paid attention
to taxes.''\footnote{Martin, ``Welcome to the Tax Cutting Party,'' 127.
  Emphasis Martin.} This transformation is closer to a theory of change
from above than was the mortgage moratorium movement, but still firmly
rooted in grass. The next movements are much different; they see
political strategists and small, connected groups of activists introduce
citizens to ever more radical suggestions. I understand this shift as
taking place in a moment of transition: when there suddenly opens
unsettled ground to be claimed, it is the elites who decide what flag it
will fly. The ground was unsettled in the sense that the partisan coding
of anti-tax policies was ambiguous---the two parties had converged more
or less---where Democrats had backed debt politics before the mortgage
moratoria.

In the final centering of tax policy on the national level, Ronald
Reagan was the agent of change. The explosive success of Proposition 13
changed Reagan's mind on taxes. Before, he had been convinced that tax
limits would just shift the burden of taxation onto one of its other
forms in personal or corporate taxation.\footnote{Martin, 129.} This
belief came from a connection made between revenue and expenditure, a
logic of reaping what one sows. In California, however, local
governments did not collapse, and what changes did occur to the
provision of social services evidently did not summon a pro-tax
backlash; in other words, ``you could cut taxes deeply without worrying
about deficits.''\footnote{Martin, 130.} The reality about this
de-coupling is very important to my argument. There have \emph{always}
been large chunks of the federal budget that could legally be trimmed.
Yet, the focus of balancing the deficit rarely falls (and rarely fell)
on this most massive discretionary chunk, military spending. The
purported want to balance budgets---echoed by every recent
president---does not imply a need to contain visible (or invisible)
welfare programs and transfers to local governments. Rather, it is by
political construction that programs like the Neighborhood Stabilization
Program end up in budget debates.

Reagan's 1980 presidential campaign picked up on the Proposition 13
rhetoric, mentioning taxes in more times than any previous candidate had
in his nomination acceptance speech.\footnote{Campbell, ``What Americans
  Think of Taxes.''} He offered tax cuts within a larger theory,
connecting the private economic conditions with larger social problems.
These would respond, not to the popular New Deal provisions, but to the
increase in expenditure caused by Lyndon Johnson's Great Society, not
yet 20 years old. Taxes were certainly not the only issue on his
platform, but they are that for which he is remembered: the Iranian
hostage situation and antidote to Jimmy Carter's ``Crisis of
Confidence'' sermon were contingencies where taxes were a certainty. And
his signature tax cut---the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 that
spurred savings and loan banks to sell off mortgages---led to a huge
contemporary and lingering spike in popularity.(REFERENCE NEEDED)

After the reforms of the first term, the campaign ramped up its tax
rhetoric. @ref(fig:acceptance) shows the massive spike in tax mentions
in nomination acceptance speeches (left) and general election television
ads (right), aligning with the 1984 election. Bolstered by the knowledge
that one could uncouple taxes from spending, Reagan was able to fend off
Democratic challenger Walter Mondale's criticism that, ``Mr.~Reagan will
raise taxes and so will I. He won't tell you.''\footnote{Raines, ``Party
  Nominates Rep. Ferraro; Mondale, in Acceptance, Vows Fair Policies and
  Deficit Cut.''} Ronald Reagan would go on to win every state except
Minnesota, Mondale's home.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figure/campbell}

}

\caption{Number of tax mentions by party in presidential nomination acceptance speeches.}\label{fig:acceptance1}
\end{figure}
\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figure/campbell2}

}

\caption{Percentage of general election TV ads to feature taxation.}\label{fig:acceptance2}
\end{figure}

After Ronald Reagan, it was the House Republicans who fueled the drive
towards lower taxes. Isaac William Martin takes over here:

\begin{quote}
Gingrich derided {[}balanced-budget Republicans'{]} argument for tax
increases as an ``automatic, old-time Republican answer.'' He thereby
implied that the \emph{new} Republican answer was to cut taxes even when
there was a deficit. After President Reagan signed tax increases in 1982
and 1983, Gingrich was instrumental in rewriting the Republican Party
platform in 1984 to repudiate further tax increases. In 1990, he broke
ranks with President George H. W. Bush and led House Republicans in
voting down the president's budget---because it included a tax
increase.\footnote{Martin, ``Welcome to the Tax Cutting Party,'' 133.}
\end{quote}

I dwelt on Ronald Reagan's tenure because it was an inflection point in
national politics. The breakdown of Fordism in the United States, and
its replacement by asset-backed political economy, was aided by Reagan's
policies. In contrast, the crystallization of taxation as dominant
Republican issue, while crucial to telling the story of how past became
present, is less important to understanding how housing and taxation
function conceptually in American politics.

As such, I will race through Clinton's presidency with equal pace.
Notable in the Campbell graphs are the mentions of taxation by Democrats
in the Clinton era. So, while Gingrich drove legislation such as the
Contract with America and the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Act through Congress, it was not he---nor
Republicans---alone. In addition, Clinton co-opted what had been
Republican positions on welfare, and his labeling as a Third Way or New
Democrat can be seen as trying to distance his politics from those of
the party generally. Clinton's focus on budget balance differed from
what Reagan and Gingrich had pushed, re-coupling revenue with
expenditure, but the expenditure in focus was (as always) welfare. By
``end{[}ing{]} welfare as we know it,'' Clinton coupled preference for
social insurance with preference for higher taxes. After Clinton, the
presidential campaigns of Barack Obama and John Kerry would return
Democratic campaigns to emphasizing the need for higher taxes and more
supportive (visible) welfare programs.

Following Isaac William Martin's argument about the importance of
Proposition 13, I have argued that tax activism propelled Republican
victories in the 1980s. Successive legislative and electoral efforts
would then de-couple taxes from government spending, leaving a narrow
set of discretionary spending over which candidates and legislators
could argue. This set emphasized visible welfare programs (such as
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families) that socialized insurance
across the tax base. By centering taxes in the national conversation,
individual debt politics became increasingly illegible to voters.
Additionally, the connection between welfare spending and taxes meant
that those who felt secure financially would opt to keep otherwise-taxed
income instead of the social insurance policies those funds were
supposedly directed towards. The connection between spending and
taxation, however, fades from view somewhat in the early 21st century,
as massive funds are appropriated for the War on Terror while Bush's
first tax cuts remain deep. Reconnecting those threads were the work of
anti-tax organizations and their allies in Congress, with Obama's
emergency stimulus packages offering the opportunity of a political
career.

\hypertarget{emergence-of-the-tea-party}{%
\subsection{Emergence of the Tea
Party}\label{emergence-of-the-tea-party}}

The Tea Party rejuvenated the connection between spending and taxes in
response to President Barack Obama's stimulus bill. The American
Reinvestment and Recovery Act of 2009 (ARRA) injected \$787 billion into
the United States economy via direct federal spending and indirect
transfers to states and localities, {[}re-{]}authorizing a range of
programs including the Neighborhood Stabilization Program. Until then,
debate about the national debt had fallen slack as the War on Terror
justified huge amounts of spending to Republicans (and Democrats, at
first), while Democrats since the New Deal have accommodated larger
deficits in return for social insurance programs. With a Democrat in the
White House, anti-tax organizers pointed to the increase in welfare
spending as an unconsented-to burden on the American taxpayer and steps
down the road to federal bankruptcy. This movement came to knock on the
doors of troubled American homeowners when Rick Santelli, a reporter for
CNBC, launched into an tirade from the trading floor of the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange at the thought of the American taxpayer
``subsidizing the losers' mortgages,'' calling for a ``Chicago Tea Party
in July.''\footnote{``CNBC's Rick Santelli's Chicago Tea Party.''}

The rant transfigured debt relief into a taxation issue, bundling it
with ARRA's other increases, and making debt relief suddenly legible to
the Republican party. In the following days, prominent conservative and
anti-tax organizations, such as the Heritage Foundation and Americans
for Tax Relief, convened conference calls to capitalize on the
opportunity. Rallies around the country and demonstrations by smaller
groups of organizers were backed by anti-tax organizations and wealthy
conservatives such as the Koch brothers. While this movement garnered
criticism that the facially grassroots activity was mere
``astroturfing'', it may have nonetheless propelled Republicans to win
back the House of Representatives in the 2010 midterm elections. The Tea
Party, then both formal Congressional caucus and loose alliance of
conservatives, sharpened the connection between government spending and
taxation that had been dulled by Bush's first term. Their politics of
debt relief substituted the national debt for household debt, and
transfigured the latter into an opponent of anti-tax sentiment.

@ref(fig:publicdebt) shows the total federal public debt as a percentage
of GDP. With the exception of Bill Clinton's second term from 1997 to
2001, it grew at various rates since the Economic Recovery Tax Act of
1981. And until Obama's stimulus bill, debt politics entered the
national conversation exclusively as \emph{the} national debt. The
debate about the debt shaped the presidential race most dramatically: a
nationally-televised town hall debate between Clinton, George H. W.
Bush, and Ross Perot in 1992. An ill-informed question about the effects
of the national debt on the candidates' lives prompted is cited by
campaign advisers and political analysts as an inflection point in the
race, when Clinton could connect and Bush could not.(REFERENCE WANTED)
This example serves only to highlight the importance of the question in
1992, and more broadly in the late 1990s and early 2000s, when concerns
about America's economic power were heightened by the growth of Japanese
and Chinese foreign direct investment. The volume of rhetoric
surrounding the debt was perhaps a reason that bipartisan spending cuts
were able to pass both houses of Congress.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth]{figure/publicdebt}

}

\caption{Federal public debt as a percentage of gross domestic product.}\label{fig:publicdebt}
\end{figure}

Outside the Clinton presidency, however, debt became the norm. Despite
H. W. Bush's promise of ``No new taxes,'' Democrats passed the Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, which raised taxes and introduced
restrictions on expenditures in an effort to combat deficit spending,
but was unsuccessful in slowing the growth of debt relative to gross
domestic product. A generation later, George W. Bush would trigger a
very moderate rise in debt-to-GDP, but a very large rise in real (2017)
dollars, by increasing military spending from \$433 billion in 2001 to
\$707 billion in 2008\footnote{``Military Expenditure by Country, in
  Constant (2017) US\$ M., 1988-2018.''} and slashing taxes. Finally,
the combination of Bush-era bailouts and Obama-era measures to combat
the Global Financial Crisis and Great Recession account for the shark
fin--looking feature towards the end of the 2000s.

While public opinion polling tracks the spikes and dips of this graph
reasonably well, it is confounded by the War on Terror, an expenditure
(initially) justifiable by members on both sides of the aisle. In 2002,
their first poll since the attacks of September 11, 2001, Pew Research
Center tracked a plunge in the percentage of respondents who say that
``reducing the budget deficit is a top priority.''\footnote{``Budget
  Deficit Slips as Public Priority.''} @ref(fig:deficit) shows this
trend by political party affiliation. Republican-affiliated respondents
in 2002, who by the turn of the millennium differ little in number from
Democrats and Independents, distance themselves from both affiliations,
registering the smallest number of respondents who prioritize the budget
deficit between 1994 and 2016. Priorities of the two parties reconvene
in 2009, when the economic woes of Bush are inherited by Obama (Pew
conducted the poll in mid-January), but diverge once again in 2011, as
the new Congress is sworn in following 2010's midterm elections.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth]{figure/deficit}

}

\caption{Percentage of respondents who say that reducing the budget deifict is a top priority by party affiliation.}\label{fig:deficit}
\end{figure}

While increasing Republican rhetoric about balanced budgets and taxation
has correlated nicely with Democratic presidencies (and the reverse for
Democratic rhetoric) since at least the Nixon administration,\footnote{Campbell,
  ``What Americans Think of Taxes.''} the massive expenditure demanded
of the government (see @ref(actors-motive)) compounded the Republican
case that Obama-era spending constitute profligate spending. For
Republican critics, the target of choice against Democratic presidents
is simple: visible welfare spending. Where Clinton neutralized this
criticism by signing into law welfare reform, Obama touted programs
during the Recession. Organizations like the Heritage Foundation latched
on to this narrative in a 2010 report entitled ``Confronting the
Unsustainable Growth of Welfare Entitlements'':

\begin{quote}
According to Obama's published budget plans, means-tested welfare
spending over the next decade will total \$10.3 trillion, not including
spending for Obamacare. Most of this welfare spendathon will be financed
by borrowing from future generations. Not surprisingly, the federal debt
will grow to equal nearly the entire national economy by the end of the
decade. ¶ This endless spending growth is unsustainable and will drive
the nation into bankruptcy.\footnote{Bradley and Rector, ``Confronting
  the Unsustainable Growth of Welfare Entitlements.''}
\end{quote}

This passage, like the report as a whole, argues that ``means-tested
welfare''\footnote{`Means-tested' describes a provision of a public good
  and/or subsidy that requires of its recipients certain behavior (such
  as a work requirement) or a certain status, namely that wealth or
  income be \emph{below} a particular level. It does not, despite first
  impressions, provide benefits only to people of means, as do invisible
  welfare programs such as the mortgage interest deduction.} would be
responsible for the impoverishment of the US. It draws a connection
between the `welfare spendathon' and national debt, though it does not
explicitly say---nor give evidence for the argument---that means-tested
welfare will cause the American economy to equal the US gross domestic
product. I assert that this frame of argument is common among anti-tax
advocates, the placement of blame solely on welfare spending for the sin
of unbalanced budgets and high taxes (connected elsewhere in the
report).

The Heritage Foundation report is a thorough, well-paced, academic echo
of the Santelli rant televised to the nation on February 19, 2009.
Santelli's speech recasts the foreclosures of millions---and the
mortgage debt of millions more---as a burden on taxpayers, indistinct
from unemployment insurance, Medicare, and food stamps. Standing on the
trading floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Santelli opens with
the claim that ``The government is promoting bad behavior!'' seeing
crises as openings through which moral hazard creeps. In his eyes, the
goal of American economic and social policy is to promote personal
responsibility and combat theories of change used by countries like
Cuba, where they ``moved from the individual to the collective.'' The
foreclosure crisis is not about ``subsidize{[}ing{]} the losers'
mortgages,'' but using market forces to weed out those who make
irresponsible or unprofitable investments ``and give 'em (the foreclosed
houses) to people that might have a chance to actually prosper down the
road and reward people that could carry the water instead of drink the
water.'' Santelli latches on to personal responsibility and strong
property rights against a ``want to pay for your neighbor's mortgage
that has an extra bathroom and can't pay their bills.''\footnote{``CNBC's
  Rick Santelli's Chicago Tea Party.''} His speech leverages Republican
enemies (Communist-controlled Cuba, irresponsible debtors, economic
inefficiencies) and friends (the individual, the entrepreneur, personal
wealth) to slot this unfamiliar mortgage default problem into a more
familiar narrative about personal responsibility and taxpayer burdens.

This moment coincided with burgeoning anti-tax organizations around the
country. Americans for Prosperity, founded and backed by brothers David
and Charles Koch, had advocated around the idea of a formal, political
Tea Party since 2002.\footnote{Zuesse, ``Final Proof the Tea Party Was
  Founded as A Bogus AstroTurf Movement.''} The organization built out
chapters around the country, with state chapters growing in power and
turning membership rolls into legislative victories.\footnote{Skocpol,
  Hertel-Fernandez, and Tervo, ``How the Koch Brothers Built the Most
  Powerful Rightwing Group You've Never Heard of.''} After the Santelli
affair, rallies of up to a few thousand protesters gathered in cities
around the United States, and in September 2009, tens of thousands
marched on Washington. The movement had outsize influence due to its
insurgency, receiving a jolt of energy when Dave Brat unseated House
Majority Leader Eric Cantor, a first in American primary
politics.\footnote{Linton, ``House Majority Leader Eric Cantor Defeated
  by Tea Party Challenger David Brat in Virginia GOP Primary.''}

\hypertarget{conclusion}{%
\subsection{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}}

The Neighborhood Stabilization Program, by insulating homeowners from
the wiles of the market, sought to construct an artificial environment
where ownership would bring success. By this aim, the NSP fit in
President George W. Bush's ownership society doctrine, and the
asset-backed political economy that had propelled presidential campaigns
since Ronald Reagan's second term as well as the American economy more
generally. However, this asset-backed political economy had not received
the functional blessing of the Republican party. At the subnational
level, the party focused far more on taxation than on assets; these
priorities were complementary (or at least independent of each other) so
long as asset prices rose. When these prices fell, and an economy that
had reconfigured itself to feed off rising asset prices sputtered, the
governmental outlays required to remedy the situation totaled several
hundred billion dollars. This price tag met simmering rhetoric about
balanced budgets and decreased welfare spending, neither of which came
to pass under the economic crisis policies of Bush's later and Obama's
early years. Preheated by wealthy conservatives, anti-tax organizers
heeded the call of Rick Santelli to advocate for lower taxes coupled
with lower spending, all wrapped up in the Tea Party movement.

While this chapter aims to connect higher housing prices to lower
welfare spending to lower taxes to voting for Republicans (or at least
Tea Party Republicans) in 2010, the very fact of its existence speaks to
the historical contingency of such a connection. In the next chapter, I
will review political psychology literature to get at a model of voter
preferences. Where it deals directly with this connection between
housing prices and right-wing voting, it neglects the coincidence of
interests that led to such a possibility. I counter its ahistoricism
with this chapter, which also serves as sort of a macrotheory of the
response to this crisis: where the next chapter will look at
individuals, I look here at the groups which shape the individuals.

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-boardofgovernorsofthefederalreservesystemus1949mortgagec}{}%
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). ``Mortgage Debt
Outstanding, All Holders.'' \emph{FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis}. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MDOAH, October 1949.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-boardofgovernorsofthefederalreservesystemus1949mortgagea}{}%
---------. ``Mortgage Debt Outstanding by Type of Property: Farm.''
\emph{FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis}.
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MDOTPFP, October 1949.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-boardofgovernorsofthefederalreservesystemus1949mortgageb}{}%
---------. ``Mortgage Debt Outstanding by Type of Property: Nonfarm and
Nonresidential.'' \emph{FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis}.
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MDOTPNNRP, October 1949.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-boardofgovernorsofthefederalreservesystemus1980mortgage}{}%
---------. ``Mortgage Debt Service Payments as a Percent of Disposable
Personal Income.'' \emph{FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis}.
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MDSP, January 1980.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-bradley2010confronting}{}%
Bradley, Katharine, and Robert Rector. ``Confronting the Unsustainable
Growth of Welfare Entitlements: Principles of Reform and the Next
Steps.'' Washington, DC: The Heritage Foundation, June 2010.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-2016budget}{}%
``Budget Deficit Slips as Public Priority.'' Washington, DC: Pew
Research Center, January 2016.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-campbell2009how}{}%
Campbell, Andrea Louise. ``How Americans Think About Taxes: Lessons from
the History of Tax Attitudes.'' \emph{Proceedings. Annual Conference on
Taxation and Minutes of the Annual Meeting of the National Tax
Association} 102 (2009): 157--64.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-campbell2009what}{}%
---------. ``What Americans Think of Taxes.'' In \emph{The New Fiscal
Sociology}, edited by Isaac William Martin, Ajay K. Mehrotra, and Monica
Prasad, 48--67. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511627071.004}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ricksantelliCNBCRickSantelli2009}{}%
``CNBC's Rick Santelli's Chicago Tea Party.'' CNBC, February 2009.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-dayenChainTitleHow2016}{}%
Dayen, David. \emph{Chain of Title: How Three Ordinary Americans
Uncovered Wall Street's Great Foreclosure Fraud}. New York: The New
Press, 2016.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-2004fact}{}%
``Fact Sheet: America's Ownership Society: Expanding Opportunities.''
Archive. \emph{The White House: President George W. Bush}.
https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2004/08/20040809-9.html,
August 2004.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ferreira2015new}{}%
Ferreira, Fernando, and Joseph Gyourko. ``A New Look at the U.S.
Foreclosure Crisis: Panel Data Evidence of Prime and Subprime Borrowers
from 1997 to 2012.'' Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic
Research, June 2015. \url{https://doi.org/10.3386/w21261}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-fliter2012fighting}{}%
Fliter, John A., and Derek S. Hoff. \emph{Fighting Foreclosure: The
Blaisdell Case, the Contract Clause, and the Great Depression}. Landmark
Law Cases \& American Society. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of
Kansas, 2012.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-2019historical}{}%
``Historical Sources of Income and Tax Items.'' \emph{Tax Policy
Center}.
https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/historical-sources-income-and-tax-items,
October 2019.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-2002homeownership}{}%
``Homeownership Policy Book - Chapter 1.'' Archive. \emph{The White
House: President George W. Bush}.
https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/infocus/homeownership/homeownership-policy-book-ch1.html,
2002.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-immergluckPreventingNextMortgage2015}{}%
Immergluck, Daniel. \emph{Preventing the Next Mortgage Crisis: The
Meltdown, the Federal Response, and the Future of Housing in America}.
Lanham: Rowman \& Littlefield Education, 2015.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-jarvis1979mad}{}%
Jarvis, Howard, and Robert Pack. \emph{I'm Mad as Hell: The Exclusive
Story of the Tax Revolt and Its Leader}. Times Books, 1979.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-keynes2007general}{}%
Keynes, John Maynard, and Paul R. Krugman. \emph{The General Theory of
Employment, Interest, and Money}. Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hamshire ;
New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-kingdon1995agendas}{}%
Kingdon, John W. \emph{Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies}. New
York: Longman, 1995.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-klein2008disowned}{}%
Klein, Naomi. ``Disowned by the Ownership Society.'' \emph{The Nation},
February 2008.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-krugman2009reagan}{}%
Krugman, Paul. ``Reagan Did It.'' \emph{The New York Times}, May 2009.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-lewis2010fat}{}%
Lewis, Michael. ``The Fat Men and Their Marvelous Money Machine.'' In
\emph{Liar's Poker}. W.W. Norton \& Company, 2010.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-linton2014house}{}%
Linton, Eric. ``House Majority Leader Eric Cantor Defeated by Tea Party
Challenger David Brat in Virginia GOP Primary.'' \emph{International
Business Times}.
https://www.ibtimes.com/house-majority-leader-eric-cantor-defeated-tea-party-challenger-david-brat-virginia-gop-1597736,
June 2014.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-martin2008welcome}{}%
Martin, Isaac William. ``Welcome to the Tax Cutting Party: How the Tax
Revolt Transformed Republican Politics.'' In \emph{The Permanent Tax
Revolt: How the Property Tax Transformed American Politics}, 126--45.
Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press, 2008.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-2019military}{}%
``Military Expenditure by Country, in Constant (2017) US\$ M.,
1988-2018.'' Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, 2019.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-pelofsky2008bush}{}%
Pelofsky, Jeremy. ``Bush Signs Housing Bill as Fannie Mae Grows.''
\emph{Reuters}, July 2008.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-pelosi2008housing}{}%
Pelosi, Nancy. ``Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008,'' July 2008.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-poterba1995stock}{}%
Poterba, James M., Andrew A. Samwick, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert J.
Shiller. ``Stock Ownership Patterns, Stock Market Fluctuations, and
Consumption.'' \emph{Brookings Papers on Economic Activity} 1995, no. 2
(1995): 295--372. \url{https://doi.org/10.2307/2534614}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-raines1984party}{}%
Raines, Howell. ``Party Nominates Rep. Ferraro; Mondale, in Acceptance,
Vows Fair Policies and Deficit Cut.'' \emph{The New York Times}, July
1984, 1.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-schwartz2009subprime}{}%
Schwartz, Herman M. \emph{Subprime Nation: American Power, Global
Capital, and the Housing Bubble}. Cornell Studies in Money. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 2009.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-skocpol2018how}{}%
Skocpol, Theda, Alexandra Hertel-Fernandez, and Caroline Tervo. ``How
the Koch Brothers Built the Most Powerful Rightwing Group You've Never
Heard of.'' \emph{The Guardian}, September 2018.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-sternInviolateHomeHousing2010}{}%
Stern, Stephanie M. ``The Inviolate Home: Housing Exceptionalism in the
Fourth Amendment.'' SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science
Research Network, May 2010.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-stollerHousingCrashEnd2016}{}%
Stoller, Matt. ``The Housing Crash and the End of American
Citizenship.'' \emph{Fordham Urban Law Journal} 39, no. 4 (February
2016): 1183.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-usbureauofeconomicanalysis1929gross}{}%
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. ``Gross Domestic Product.''
\emph{FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis}.
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/GDPA, January 1929.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-zuesse2013final}{}%
Zuesse, Eric. ``Final Proof the Tea Party Was Founded as A Bogus
AstroTurf Movement.'' \emph{HuffPost}.
https://www.huffpost.com/entry/final-proof-the-tea-party\_b\_4136722,
October 2013.

\end{document}
